# 🔬 Lab 1: VGA Synchronization

## 📌 Objectives

- Students should be able to generate a time-critical signal, VGA.

:::{note}
Before software can be reusable, it first has to be usable. 
:::


## 📜 Synopsis

In this lab, you will write a VGA controller in VHDL and implement it on your FPGA development board. You will be provided a VGA-to-HDMI module that will automatically format your output for the HDMI output port on your development board. This VGA controller will be tasked to generate the display portion of an oscilloscope as shown in the figure below. The scope face consists of a white grid, used to measure the signals, two trigger markers, and the waveforms. The grid shall contain 11 vertical lines and 9 horizontal lines. In this lab, the waveforms will be artificially generated by your code, but in later labs, the waveforms will be generated by incoming audio waveforms.


## 💻 Procedure

### Complete 

- **This is part of Homework 5** 
- Complete `ADC0_InitSWTriggerCh17_14_16()` and `ADC_In17_14_16()` located in the `ADC14.c` file.
- Refer to the instructions provided within the `ADC14.c` file to guide you through the completion of these functions.
- Copy and paste the code into Gradescope to submit your Homework 15.

Before starting this lab, review the solutions available in Gradescope to confirm that you have the correct code.  If the solutions are not published in Gradescope, go through your code with your instructor.

- The component block diagram of this lab is shown below. 

```{image} ./figures/Lab15_CBD.png
:width: 760
:align: center
```
<br>

### Demo `Program15_1()`

```{important}
You should understand the main code provided in every module. No such code will be provided for your final project, and you must write your main.c from scratch.  
```

- Finish the implementation of `LCDOut1()` in the `Lab15_ADCmain.c` file. 
- Demo the functionality of `Program15_1()` by running it with raw digital sensor values as illustrated below. 
- Disregard the distance values displayed on the LCD screen for this particular section.
- **Note**: The distance sensors are powered by the chassis board.  

```{image} ./figures/Lab15_ADC.png
:width: 260
:align: center
```
<br>

<center>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/oI-ZincragE" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</center>
<br>


### Calibrate your sensors

For each IR sensor, you will empirically determine the two calibration constants ($m$ and $c$). Each sensor will have its own $m$ and $c$ constants. To determine these values, go to [Calibration](./lab15_calibration.ipynb).


### Complete functions in `IRDistance.c`

- Implement `LeftConvert()`, `RightConvert()`, and `CenterConvert()` in the `IRDistance.c` file.
- You should have already determined the calibration coefficients, denoted as $n$ and $c, in the previous section.
- As discussed in the Synopsis section, these functions should return the actual distance, $L$, from **the center of the robot to the wall**.
- Ensure that if the ADC value is less than the ADC value for 800 mm (e.g., 2244 as shown in the example on the calibration page), your function should return a distance of 800 mm.
- Use integer values for all calculations in Code Composer Studio (CCS).
- Make use of `enum` and `#define` for constants rather than hard-coding numbers. Deductions will be made for the use of hard-coded numbers. 
- `ADCMAX_xxxx` is the ADC value at 800mm.
- Demo the `Program15_1` function running with accurate distance values on the LCD. Utilize distances of 150, 200, 250, and 300 mm for your demo. The error should be less than 50 mm during the demo. You can use one of the paper rulers available in the lab (donated by IKEA) for this purpose. While a live demo is preferred, a video demonstration is also acceptable. If you opt for a video demo, **be sure to include your voice to clearly state the distances you are testing**.


<center>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BFKF1ZMtGAc" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</center>
<br>



### Write and test the `Classify()` function.

- Open `Classifier.h` under the `inc` folder. 
- Add the following state representations to the enumerated type:
```C
ClassificationError = 0
LeftTooClose = 1
RightTooClose = 2
CenterTooClose = 4
Straight = 8
LeftTurn = 9
RightTurn = 10
TeeJoint = 11
LeftJoint = 12
RightJoint = 13
CrossRoad = 14
Blocked = 15
```
<br>

```{note}
We put the enumerated types in the header file so that any code files that include the .h file can access these constants.
```

- Open the `Classifier.c` file located in the project folder.
- We will define the bounds using `#define` constants to enhance the clarity of the classification algorithm. You will have the opportunity to fine-tune these values during the final project to align them with the actual distances within the maze.

```C
#define SIDEMIN    212   // smallest side distance to the wall in mm
#define SIDEMAX    354   // largest side distance to wall in mm
#define CENTERMIN  150   // min distance to the wall in the front
#define CENTEROPEN 600   // distance to the wall between open/blocked
#define IRMIN      50    // min possible reading of IR sensor
#define IRMAX      800   // max possible reading of IR sensor
```
<br>

- Develop the following classification algorithm, which will produce the following results:
    - ClassificationError (0) if any of the sensors report distances **less than** 50 mm or **greater than** 800 mm.
    - LeftTooClose (1) if the left sensor reports a distance **less than** 212 mm.
    - RightTooClose (2) if the right sensor reports a distance **less than** 212 mm.
    - CenterTooClose (4) if the center sensor reports a distance **less than** 150 mm.
    - Combining conditions may result in multiple simultaneous danger states. For example, 5 indicates both CenterTooClose and LeftTooClose, while 7 implies all three directions are too close.
    - The remaining classifications (Straight (8) - Blocked (15)) depend on the states of the sensors.

First, let's focus on the center sensor. As the robot approaches an intersection, the center sensor plays a crucial role in distinguishing between two scenarios:
- {Blocked, Right Turn, Left Turn, Tee Joint}: When the center sensor measures a distance **less than** 600 mm.
- {Straight, Right Joint, Left Joint, Cross Road}: When the center sensor measures a distance **greater than or equal to** 600 mm.

It's important to note that, in scenarios involving long straight roads, there's no defined maximum acceptable value for the sensors.

For our measurements, we consider a road that is 400 mm wide with side sensors placed at 45-degree angles. When the robot is positioned in the middle of the road in the straight or blocked scenarios, both side sensors placed at 45 degrees should read approximately 283 mm.

If the robot is within 50 mm from the center of the road in the straight or blocked scenarios, the side sensors can measure distances ranging from 212 mm (SIDEMIN) to 354 mm (SIDEMAX). The threshold of 354 mm (SIDEMAX) is used to determine whether it's feasible to make a left or right turn at the upcoming intersection:
- A reading less than 354 mm (SIDEMAX) suggests that the turn path is not feasible.
- A reading of 354 mm (SIDEMAX) or higher indicates that the turn path is feasible.

After completing the implementation of the `Classify()` function in the `Classifier.c` file, proceed with the following steps.
- Open the `Lab15_ADCmain.c` file in the project folder.
- Scroll down to the `main()` function and make sure that the line with `Program15_2()` is uncommented while the other two are commented.
- Add the variables `left`, `center`, `right`, `result`, `truth`, and `errors` to the Expressions tab.
- Run `main()` by selecting the debug tool.
- Monitor the value of `errors`. If it exceeds 0, utilize breakpoints to debug your `Classify()` function and observe the program's state."

Please note that `Program15_2` focuses on testing corner cases. In the context of the `Classify()` function, there's a wide range of possible inputs, with each of the three sensors varying from 50 to 800. This results in a total of $751^3$ possibilities, which is equal to 423,564,751 unique inputs. While an exhaustive test (`Program15_3`) would cover all these inputs, the nature of the problem allows us to significantly reduce the number of test values while retaining testing accuracy. This reduction is achieved by strategically selecting test values around the threshold points. This practice, known as testing "corner cases," enables us to minimize the number of test values from $751^3$ to just 18. Specifically, we will test values that are within $\pm 1$ of the threshold values, which include 50, 150, 212, 354, 600, and 800.

### Demo the `Classify()` function.

- Complete the `LCDOut4()` function for displaying data on the LCD.
- Use the maze in the lab to test a combination of seven "too close" cases and eight normal cases.
- Demo `Program15_4()` displaying the classifications on the LCD. Your demo should include at least three error cases (where `enum scenario` is less than or equal to 7) and at least five non-error cases (where `enum scenario` is greater than 7).
- While a live demo is preferred, a video demo is also acceptable. If opting for a video demo, please **include your voice to clearly explain the classifications you are testing**.
- Ensure that you provide comments in your code for clarity and push your code to your repository using git.

## 🚚 Deliverables (2 extra points)

### Deliverable 1 
- **[5 Points]** Demo `Program15_1()` to display raw ADC data on the LCD. Note that the distance values on the LCD are not valid at this stage.

### Deliverable 2 
- **[5 Points]** Calibrate your sensors. Submit three plots for your right, center, and left sensors. 

### Deliverable 3 
- **[5 Points]** Demo `Program15_1()` with accurate distances on the LCD. 
Choose three distances (100, 300, and 500 mm) for each sensor and use a ruler in the lab for measurement. You can do a live demo, which is preferred, or provide a video demo. If you choose a video demo, ensure that you **include your voice to clearly state the distances you are testing**.

### Deliverable 4 
- **[5 Points]** Provide a screenshot of the Expressions tab after running `Program15_2()`. Ensure that `left`, `center`, `right`, `result`, `truth`, and `errors` are visible in the Expressions tab. 
- Note that providing a screenshot before running the program will result in a grade of 0.

### Deliverable 5 
- **[5 Points]** Demo `Program15_4()` to display the classifications on the LCD. Ensure you show at least three error cases (enum scenario <= 7) and at least five non-error cases (enum scenario > 7). You can do a live demo, which is preferred, or provide a video demo. If you choose a video demo, **include your voice to clearly state the classifications you are testing**. 

### Deliverable 6 
- **[6.5 Points]**  Ensure that you provide comments in your code for clarity and push your code to your repository using git.

This lab was originally adapted from the [TI-RSLK MAX Solderless Maze Edition Curriculum](https://university.ti.com/en/faculty/ti-robotics-system-learning-kit/ti-rslk-max-edition-curriculum) and has since been significantly modified.
